## Scalar Start From Beginning

### plain

Let's start with some simple operations we can apply on matrices. 

### plain

Firstly, given two matrices of the same size, we can add them together. This is taking each entry and adding them together.

### tex

$$\textbf{\Large Matrix Addition} \\ $$

$$\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1n}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mn}\end{pmatrix}+\begin{pmatrix}b_{11}&b_{12}&\cdots&b_{1n}\\b_{21}&b_{22}&\cdots&b_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\b_{m1}&b_{m2}&\cdots&b_{mn}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}+b_{11}&a_{12}+b_{12}&\cdots&a_{1n}+b_{1n}\\a_{21}+b_{21}&a_{22}+b_{22}&\cdots&a_{2n}+b_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}+b_{m1}&a_{m2}+b_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mn}+b_{mn}\end{pmatrix}$$

### plain

Next, to add something $c$ times of something is the same as multiplying it by $c$. This is how we define scalar multiplication of a matrix as well: 

### tex
$$\textbf{\Large Scalar Multiplication} \\ $$

$$c\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1n}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mn}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}ca_{11}&ca_{12}&\cdots&ca_{1n}\\ca_{21}&ca_{22}&\cdots&ca_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\ca_{m1}&ca_{m2}&\cdots&ca_{mn}\end{pmatrix}$$

## VectorEqn Vector Equations

### plain

Recap from 2.1, a (column) vector is a matrix with $1$ column only.

### mcq

Using the above rules of matrix algebra, what do you think the following expression evaluates to? $x$ and $y$ in this case are some real numbers

$$x\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \\
\end{array}\right) + y\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4 \\\end{array}\right)$$

* $\left(\begin{array}{c} 2x+y \\ 3x+4y \\\end{array}\right)$
- Can we even do this?

### mcq

Now, given the following equation, solve for $x$ and $y$:

$$x\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \\
\end{array}\right) + y\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4 \\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 21 \\ 34 \\
\end{array}\right)$$

* $x = 10$, $y = 1$

### plain

Since we have that:

$$x\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \\
\end{array}\right) + y\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4 \\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 2x+y \\ 3x+4y \\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 21 \\ 34 \\
\end{array}\right)$$

This is the same as solving this system of linear equations!
$$\begin{array}{}
        2x &+&     y &=& 21 \\
        3x &+&    4y &=& 34 \\
\end{array}$$

## MatrixVector Matrix-Vector Multiplication

### plain

So far, we've expressed a system of a linear equations in two ways:

Just now, we expressed it as a vector equation - $x$ times vector $1$ plus $y$ times vector $2$

In chapter 1, we expressed it as an augmented matrix

### plain

Let's try to bridge this gap using a new way method: <b>Matrix Multiplication</b>. But first let's start with a simpler case where we multiply a matrix and a vector together.

### plain

For some matrix $A$ and vector $x$, we can multiply them: $Ax = u$ to get a new vector $u$.

### tex
$$\textbf{\Large Matrix-Vector Multiplication} \\ $$

$$\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1p}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2p}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mp}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}x_{1}\\x_{2}\\ \vdots\\x_{p}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}x_1a_{11} + x_1a_{12} + \dots + x_1a_{1p}\\x_2a_{21} + x_2a_{22} + \dots + x_2a_{2p}\\ \vdots \\x_ma_{m1} + x_ma_{m2} + \dots + x_ma_{mp} \end{pmatrix}$$

### mcq

Let's try this out. What is the result of the following multipliation?

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}$$

- $\left(\begin{array}{c} 15 \\ 70\\
\end{array}\right)$
* $\left(\begin{array}{c} 20 \\ 55\\
\end{array}\right)$


### plain

$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\ \end{array}\right)$ consists of two column vectors glued together. 

When we multiply it by $\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\
\end{array}\right)$, we are saying that we want $5$ times $\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3\\\end{array}\right)$ plus $10$ times $\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4\\\end{array}\right)$

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\
\end{array}\right) = 5\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3\\\end{array}\right) + 10\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4\\\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 20 \\ 55\\\end{array}\right)$$

## Matrix Multiplcation

### plain

We've seen how when we multiply a matrix $A$ by vector $x$, we can treat the matrix $A$ as a several vectors glued together. But what if we apply this "gluing" logic to the vectors $x$? 

### dialogue

What if we multiply two matrices together? What kind of object do you expect from this mutliplication?

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}$$

- A $2 \times 2$ matrix
    - afterMatrixMulGuess
- Two vectors glued together
    - afterMatrixMulGuess
- A vector
    - afterMatrixMulGuess
- I don't know...
    - afterMatrixMulGuess

### plain afterMatrixMulGuess

We can treat the matrix $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\
\end{array}\right)$ as two vectors glued together, and perform the multiplication seperately!

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  20 \\ 55\\\end{array}\right) $$
$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 10 \\ 1\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  21 \\ 34\\\end{array}\right)$$

### mcq

Now, what should do with these two vectors?

- Glue them together!

### plain

That's right! The result of this is:

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c c} 20 & 21 \\ 55 & 34\\
\end{array}\right)$$

### plain

There are many ways to understand matrix multiplcation. Below we will describe one of them, given two matrices $A$ and $B$, we can think of multiplying $A$ and $B$ like this

1. Split $B$ into its column vectors $b_1, b_2, \dots, b_m$
2. Perform Matrix-Vector multiplication for each of the vectors $Ab_i$. Let the result of be $c_i$, i.e. $Ab_i = c_i$
3. "Glue" The vectors $c_1, c_2, \dots, c_m$ together to form the matrix $C$. $C$ is the result of multiplying $A$ and $B$. i.e. $AB = C$.


### mcq
Let's try more examples!

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4 \\ 7 & 8
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}
$$

How many rows and columns should the resulting matrix have?

- 2 rows
* 3 rows
* 2 columns
- 3 columns

### mcq

What about this?

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\ 7 & 8
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}
$$

How many rows and columns should the resulting matrix have?

- 2 rows
- 3 rows
- 2 columns
- 3 columns
* It's not possible

### plain

Let's try doing

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5  \\ 10\\ 7
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}
$$

We want $5$ times of $\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3\\\end{array}\right)$, $10$ times of $\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4\\\end{array}\right)$, and $7$ times of... there's no vector there!

This multiplication doesn't make sense because the dimensions of the matrices don't match

### mcq

Think back to the process, if we want to multiply matrices $A$ and $B$ together, what condition(s) must be satisfied?

- The no. of columns in $A$ equals the no. of columns in $B$
- The no. of rows in $A$ equals the no. of rows in $B$
* The no. of columns in $A$ equals the no. of rows in $B$
- The no. of rows in $A$ equals the no. of columns in $B$

### plain

Given matrix $A$ is $m$ by $p$ and matrix $B$ is $p$ by $mn$, $AB$ will give us a $m$ by $n$ matrix.


### tex
$\textbf{Matrix Multiplication}$
$$\mathbf{AB}=(a_{ij})_{m\times p}(b_{ij})_{p\times n}=(\sum_{k=1}^pa_{ik}b_{kj})_{m\times n}$$

$$\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1p}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2p}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mp}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}b_{11}&b_{12}&\cdots&b_{1n}\\b_{21}&b_{22}&\cdots&b_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\b_{p1}&b_{p2}&\cdots&b_{pm}\end{pmatrix}=
\begin{pmatrix}
a_{11}b_{11}+a_{12}b_{21}+\cdots+a_{1p}b_{p1}&a_{11}b_{12}+a_{12}b_{22}+\cdots+a_{1p}b_{p2}&\cdots&a_{11}b_{1n}+a_{12}b_{2n}+\cdots+a_{1p}b_{pn}\\
a_{21}b_{11}+a_{22}b_{21}+\cdots+a_{2p}b_{p1}&a_{21}b_{12}+a_{22}b_{22}+\cdots+a_{2p}b_{p2}&\cdots&a_{21}b_{1n}+a_{22}b_{2n}+\cdots+a_{2p}b_{pn}\\
\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\
a_{m1}b_{11}+a_{m2}b_{21}+\cdots+a_{mp}b_{p1}&a_{m1}b_{12}+a_{m2}b_{22}+\cdots+a_{mp}b_{p2}&\cdots&a_{m1}b_{1n}+a_{m2}b_{2n}+\cdots+a_{mp}b_{pn}
\end{pmatrix}$$

### plain

Above is the formal definition of matrix multiplication.

The $(i, j)$-entry of the product $AB$ is the sum of the product of the entries in the $i$-th row of $A$ with the $j$-th column of $B$.

We can verify that this gives us the same result as the "split B into vectors, multiply them by A, and glue them together" process that we've discussed above.
