## Scalar Start From Beginning

### plain

Let's start with some simple operations we can apply on matrices. 

### plain

Firstly, given two matrices of the same size, we can add them together. This is taking each entry and adding them together.

### tex

$$\textbf{\Large Matrix Addition} \\ $$

$$\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1n}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mn}\end{pmatrix}+\begin{pmatrix}b_{11}&b_{12}&\cdots&b_{1n}\\b_{21}&b_{22}&\cdots&b_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\b_{m1}&b_{m2}&\cdots&b_{mn}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}+b_{11}&a_{12}+b_{12}&\cdots&a_{1n}+b_{1n}\\a_{21}+b_{21}&a_{22}+b_{22}&\cdots&a_{2n}+b_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}+b_{m1}&a_{m2}+b_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mn}+b_{mn}\end{pmatrix}$$

### plain

We can also mutliply every entry in a matrix by some real number $c$. We call this scalar multiplication

### tex
$$\textbf{\Large Scalar Multiplication} \\ $$

$$c\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1n}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mn}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}ca_{11}&ca_{12}&\cdots&ca_{1n}\\ca_{21}&ca_{22}&\cdots&ca_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\ca_{m1}&ca_{m2}&\cdots&ca_{mn}\end{pmatrix}$$

## MatVec Matrix-Vector Multiplication

### mcq

Now let's do some real math with matrices! But first, let's quickly solve this system of linear equation first
$$\begin{array}{}
        2x &+&     y &=& 21 \\
        3x &+&    4y &=& 34 \\
\end{array}$$

* $x = 10$, $y = 1$

### mcq

Using the above rules of matrix algebra, what do you think the following expression evaluates to? 

$$x\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \\
\end{array}\right) + y\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4 \\\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}$$

* $\left(\begin{array}{c} 2x+y \\ 3x+4y \\\end{array}\right)$
- Can we even do this?

### plain

Using scalar multiplication,

$$x\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \\
\end{array}\right) + y\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4 \\\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 2x \\ 3x \\
\end{array}\right) + \left(\begin{array}{c} y \\ 4y \\\end{array}\right)$$

And using matrix addition,

$$\left(\begin{array}{c} 2x \\ 3x \\
\end{array}\right) + \left(\begin{array}{c} y \\ 4y \\\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 2x+y \\ 3x+4y \\\end{array}\right)$$


### plain

Going back to the start, we can also express the system of linear equations as a vector equation:

$$x\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \\
\end{array}\right) + y\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4 \\\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 21 \\ 34 \\\end{array}\right)$$

### plain

Now, we'll introduce the final form of system of linear equations 😈

### plain

The same equation can be expressed as a <b> Matrix Equation </b>

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} x \\ y\\ \end{array}\right) = x\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3 \\
\end{array}\right) + y\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4 \\\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 21 \\ 34 \\\end{array}\right)$$

### plain

When we multiply a matrix of $n$ columns with a vector of $n$ rows, we get a new vector of $n$ rows. The following is the full formula:

### tex
$$\textbf{\Large Matrix-Vector Multiplication} \\ $$

$$\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1p}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2p}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mp}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}x_{1}\\x_{2}\\ \vdots\\x_{p}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}x_1a_{11} + x_2a_{12} + \dots + x_pa_{1p}\\x_1a_{21} + x_2a_{22} + \dots + x_pa_{2p}\\ \vdots \\x_1a_{m1} + x_2a_{m2} + \dots + x_pa_{mp} \end{pmatrix}$$

### mcq

If it's abit confusing, let's try an example! What is the result of the following multipliation?

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\ \end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}$$

- $\left(\begin{array}{c} 15 \\ 70\\ \end{array}\right)$
* $\left(\begin{array}{c} 20 \\ 55\\ \end{array}\right)$


### plain

We can visualize $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\ \end{array}\right)$ as two column vectors glued together. 

When we multiply it by $\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\
\end{array}\right)$, we are saying that we want $5$ times $\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3\\\end{array}\right)$ plus $10$ times $\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4\\\end{array}\right)$

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\
\end{array}\right) = 5\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3\\\end{array}\right) + 10\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4\\\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c} 20 \\ 55\\\end{array}\right)$$

## MatMal Matrix Multiplication


### dialogue

If we can multiply a matrix and a vector, and a matrix is several vectors glued together, what happens if we multiply two matrices together? What kind of object do you expect from this mutliplication?

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}$$

- A $2 \times 2$ matrix
    - afterMatrixMulGuess
- Two vectors glued together
    - afterMatrixMulGuess
- A vector
    - afterMatrixMulGuess
- I don't know...
    - afterMatrixMulGuess

### plain afterMatrixMulGuess

We can treat the matrix $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\
\end{array}\right)$ as two vectors glued together, and perform the multiplication seperately!

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5 \\ 10\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  20 \\ 55\\\end{array}\right) $$
$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 10 \\ 1\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  21 \\ 34\\\end{array}\right)$$

### mcq

Now, what should do with these two vectors?

* Glue them together!

### plain

That's right! The result of this is:

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c c} 20 & 21 \\ 55 & 34\\
\end{array}\right)$$

### plain

Here is a shorthand of matrix multiplication. Given two matrices $A$ and $B$, we can think of multiplying $A$ and $B$ like this

1. Split $B$ into its column vectors $b_1, b_2, \dots, b_m$
2. Perform Matrix-Vector multiplication for each of the vectors $Ab_i$. Let the result of be $c_i$, i.e. $Ab_i = c_i$
3. "Glue" The vectors $c_1, c_2, \dots, c_m$ together to form the matrix $C$. $C$ is the result of multiplying $A$ and $B$. i.e. $AB = C$.


### mcq
Let's try more examples!

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4 \\ 7 & 8
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}
$$

How many rows and columns should the resulting matrix have?

- 2 rows
* 3 rows
* 2 columns
- 3 columns
- It's not possible 

### mcq

What about this?

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 10 \\ 10 & 1\\ 7 & 8
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}
$$

How many rows and columns should the resulting matrix have?

- 2 rows
- 3 rows
- 2 columns
- 3 columns
* It's not possible

### plain

Let's try doing

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} 5  \\ 10\\ 7
\end{array}\right) = \textbf{??}
$$

We want $5$ times of $\left(\begin{array}{c} 2 \\ 3\\\end{array}\right)$, $10$ times of $\left(\begin{array}{c} 1 \\ 4\\\end{array}\right)$, and $7$ times of... what?

This multiplication doesn't make sense because the dimensions of the matrices don't match

### mcq

Think back to the process, if we want to multiply matrices $A$ and $B$ together, what condition(s) must be satisfied?

- The no. of columns in $A$ equals the no. of columns in $B$
- The no. of rows in $A$ equals the no. of rows in $B$
* The no. of columns in $A$ equals the no. of rows in $B$
- The no. of rows in $A$ equals the no. of columns in $B$

### plain

Given matrix $A$ is $m$ by $p$ and matrix $B$ is $p$ by $n$, $AB$ will give us a $m$ by $n$ matrix.


### tex
$\textbf{Matrix Multiplication}$
$$\mathbf{AB}=(a_{ij})_{m\times p}(b_{ij})_{p\times n}=(\sum_{k=1}^pa_{ik}b_{kj})_{m\times n}$$

$$\begin{pmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&\cdots&a_{1p}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&\cdots&a_{2p}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\a_{m1}&a_{m2}&\cdots&a_{mp}\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}b_{11}&b_{12}&\cdots&b_{1n}\\b_{21}&b_{22}&\cdots&b_{2n}\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\b_{p1}&b_{p2}&\cdots&b_{pm}\end{pmatrix}=
\begin{pmatrix}
a_{11}b_{11}+a_{12}b_{21}+\cdots+a_{1p}b_{p1}&a_{11}b_{12}+a_{12}b_{22}+\cdots+a_{1p}b_{p2}&\cdots&a_{11}b_{1n}+a_{12}b_{2n}+\cdots+a_{1p}b_{pn}\\
a_{21}b_{11}+a_{22}b_{21}+\cdots+a_{2p}b_{p1}&a_{21}b_{12}+a_{22}b_{22}+\cdots+a_{2p}b_{p2}&\cdots&a_{21}b_{1n}+a_{22}b_{2n}+\cdots+a_{2p}b_{pn}\\
\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\vdots\\
a_{m1}b_{11}+a_{m2}b_{21}+\cdots+a_{mp}b_{p1}&a_{m1}b_{12}+a_{m2}b_{22}+\cdots+a_{mp}b_{p2}&\cdots&a_{m1}b_{1n}+a_{m2}b_{2n}+\cdots+a_{mp}b_{pn}
\end{pmatrix}$$

### plain

Above is the formal definition of matrix multiplication.

The $(i, j)$-entry of the product $AB$ is the sum of the product of the entries in the $i$-th row of $A$ with the $j$-th column of $B$.

We can verify that this gives us the same result as the "split B into vectors, multiply them by A, and glue them together" process that we've discussed above.


### dialogue

That's quite abit of stuff, so let's pause here for a while. Let me know when you're ready to move on :)

- I'm ready!
    - SolvingMatrixStart

## SolvingMatrix Solving Matrix Equations

### plain SolvingMatrixStart

Now that we know how to multiply matrices, let's try to solve for a matrix instead! Below, $X$ is a matrix, and we want to solve for $X$.

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 3 & 4 \\ 1 & 2\\
\end{array}\right)X = \left(\begin{array}{c c} 16 & 12 \\ 6 & 6\\ \end{array}\right)$$

### mcq

Firstly, what is the dimensions of $X$?

- 1 Row
* 2 Rows
- 1 Column
* 2 Columns

### mcq

How should we proceed from here?

* Split $X$ into column vectors
* Split $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 16 & 12 \\ 6 & 6\\ \end{array}\right)$ into column vectors 

### plain

If we split $X = (x_1 \space \space \space x_2)$, we can write the following matrix equations:

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 3 & 4 \\ 1 & 2\\
\end{array}\right)x_1 = \left(\begin{array}{c} 16 \\ 6 \\ \end{array}\right)$$
$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 3 & 4 \\ 1 & 2\\
\end{array}\right)x_2 = \left(\begin{array}{c} 12 \\ 6 \\ \end{array}\right)$$

### plain

Recap that a matrix equation is a different way of representing a system of linear equation, and so we can write the above two equations as augmented matrices and solve them using REF or RREF algorithms!

### mcq

Try and solve it, and let me know what you got for $X$!

- $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 4 & 1 \\ 0 & 3\\ \end{array}\right)$
* $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 4 & 0 \\ 1 & 3\\ \end{array}\right)$
- $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 3 & 0 \\ 1 & 4\\ \end{array}\right)$
- $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 3 & 1 \\ 0 & 4\\ \end{array}\right)$

## ManyFormsOfMatrix 72 Matrix Transformations

### plain 

This will be the last part so bear with me a while longer


### plain StartOfMatrix

Anyways on the point that a matrix is just a bunch of vectors glued together.

erm 🤓 ackchually ☝️ I lied 🤓 kinda

It's one way to view it, and it helps simplify the abomination of a formula that is Matrix Multiplication. 

### plain

However, it is certainly not the full picture of what a matrix is. A matrix represents so many different inter-related concepts, and you'll get to explore more such concepts as you go down the course

### plain

Anyways, here's more food for thought as to why matrices multiply in this manner. Suppose we have a a system of linear equations:

$$\begin{array}{}
        2x_1 &+&     x_2 &=& y_1 \\
        3x_1 &+&    4x_2 &=& y_2 \\
\end{array}$$

Which we can write this as:

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} x_1 \\ x_2\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  y_1 \\ y_2\\\end{array}\right)$$

### plain

Now we have a second system of linear equations:

$$\begin{array}{}
        5y_1 &+&     6y_2 &=& z_1 \\
        0y_1 &+&    7y_2 &=& z_2 \\
\end{array}$$


Which we can write this as:

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 6 \\ 0 & 7\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} y_1 \\ y_2\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  z_1 \\ z_2\\\end{array}\right) $$

### plain

Here's our goal, express $z$ in terms of $x$. I.e. find the values of $a$, $b$, $c$, $d$ of the following system of linear equation.

$$\begin{array}{}
        ax_1 &+&     bx_2 &=& z_1 \\
        cx_1 &+&    dx_2 &=& z_2 \\
\end{array}$$

We could do a ton of substitution to handle this, but let's see how matrices help us here.

### mcq

If we substitute the first matrix equation into the second matrix equation, we get:

$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 6 \\ 0 & 7\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} x_1 \\ x_2\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  z_1 \\ z_2\\\end{array}\right) $$

What should we do next?

* Multiply the two matrices together!

### plain

That's right! If we multiply the first two matrices, we can get a matrix of the form


$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} a & c \\ b & d\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c} x_1 \\ x_2\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c}  z_1 \\ z_2\\\end{array}\right) $$

Which is exactly what we are trying to get!

### dialogue

I'll leave you to do the actual matrix multiplication as an excercise. Don't open the options if you wanna try it yourself first

- $\left(\begin{array}{c c} 28 & 29 \\ 21 & 28\\ \end{array}\right)$
    - afterLazy
- lazy...
    - afterLazy

### plain afterLazy
Indeed,
$$\left(\begin{array}{c c} 5 & 6 \\ 0 & 7\\
\end{array}\right)\left(\begin{array}{c c} 2 & 1 \\ 3 & 4\\
\end{array}\right) = \left(\begin{array}{c c} 28 & 29 \\ 21 & 28\\ \end{array}\right)$$

### plain 

If you'd like to see this idea fleshed out more, do check out this <a target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer" href="https://youtu.be/cc1ivDlZ71U?si=KW3jrTv0VIVQ8hbI">
Why do we multiply matrices the way we do??</a>, a great video by Michael Penn.

And that's a wrap! 



