## Checkpoint1 Determinant by Reduction

### plain

Last chapter, we learnt about cofactor expansion, but it is very slow for large matrices. Is there another way to compute determinants?

Yes! Introducing the method of finding <b>Determinant by Reduction</b>!

### tex Theorem1

Suppose $\mathbf{B}$ is obtained from $\mathbf{A}$ by a single elementary row operation, $\mathbf{A} \xrightarrow{\text{r}} \mathbf{B}$.
Then the determinant of $\mathbf{B}$ is obtained from the determinant of $\mathbf{A}$ as such.

If $r = R_i + aR_j, \text{then det}(\mathbf{B}) = \text{det}(\mathbf{A})$
If $r = cR_i, \text{then det}(\mathbf{B}) = c\space\text{det}(\mathbf{A})$
If $r = R_i \leftrightarrow R_j, \text{then det}(\mathbf{B}) = -\space\text{det}(\mathbf{A})$

$$
\begin{array}{c c}
\text{ERO} & \text{Determinant} \\
A \xrightarrow{R_i + aR_j} B & \det(B) = \det(A) \\
A \xrightarrow{cR_i} B & \det(B) = c\det(A) \\
A \xrightarrow{R_i \leftrightarrow R_j} B & \det(B) = -\det(A) \\
\end{array}
$$

### dialogue

Great!! Let's apply this knowledge!

- HOLD UPPP!! You have not even explained why it works the way it does!
  - reply

### plain reply

You are asking the right questions! The proof to this is not trivial and for the sake of sanity 😭, it will not be covered here. Feel free to discuss this in the telegram chat though!

### mcq

Suppose

$$
A = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 2 \\ 3 & 4 \end{pmatrix}
$$What is $\text{det}(\mathbf{A})$?
- 2
* -2
- 0

### plain
$\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = 1(4) - 2(3) = -2$
<br><em>Revise the previous chapter on cofactor expansion if you are unsure about this!</em>

### mcq
Now that we know $\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = -2$ and given,
$$

A \xrightarrow{R_2 + 100R_1} B.
$$What is  $\text{det}(\mathbf{B})$ without finding $\mathbf{B}$?
<em>Hint: Take a look at the theorem we just showed you!</em>

- 2

* -2

- 10
- -10

### plain

By the theorem we just learnt, row additions <b>do not</b> change the determinant of the matrix and therefore,
$\text{det}(\mathbf{B}) = \text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = -2$

### mcq

Suppose now, I am given a $3 \times 3$ matrix $\mathbf{A}$, $\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = 10$ and I can obtain $\mathbf{B}$ from $\mathbf{A}$ as such,

$$
A \xrightarrow{3R_2} B
$$ What is $\text{det}(\mathbf{B})$?

- 10
* 30
- -10
- -30

### plain
By the theorem we learnt, row scaling <b>does</b> change the determinant of the matrix. If I <b>scale a row by $c$, my determinant is also scaled by $c$</b>. Therefore,
$\text{det}(\mathbf{B}) = 3\space\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = 3(10) = 30$

### mcq
Last scenario: Given a $10 \times 10$ matrix $\mathbf{A}$, $\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = 200$ and I can obtain $\mathbf{B}$ from $\mathbf{A}$ as such,
$$

A \xrightarrow{R_3 \leftrightarrow R_7} B
$$ What is $\text{det}(\mathbf{B})$?

- 200
- 0
- -10

* -200

### plain

By the theorem we learnt, row swapping <b>does</b> change the determinant of the matrix by <b>flipping the sign</b>.
$\text{det}(\mathbf{B}) = -\space\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = -200$

### plain

Now that we went through the 3 different EROs and how they affect the determinant, what happens if I stack multiple of them together?

### mcq

Suppose

$$
A = \begin{pmatrix} 2 & 1 & 3 \\ 0 & -1 & 4 \\ 0 & 0 & 2 \end{pmatrix}
$$

$$
A \xrightarrow{R_1 \leftrightarrow R_2}{}
  \xrightarrow{3R_2}{}
  \xrightarrow{R_3 - 2R_2} D
$$<em>Hint: From previous chapter, determinant of a triangular matrix is just the multiplication of the diagonal entries.</em>

What is  $\text{det}(\mathbf{D})$ without finding $\mathbf{D}$?
- -4
- 4
* 12
- -12
- I have not learnt this!

### plain
Simply insert 'intermediate' matrices and you will see the result!
$$

\mathbf{A} \xrightarrow{R_1 \leftrightarrow R_2}\mathbf{B}\xrightarrow{3R_2}\mathbf{C}\xrightarrow{R_3-2R_2} \mathbf{D}
$$First, we need to find the starting point: $\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = 2(-1)(2) = -4$
Row Swap: $\text{det}(\mathbf{B}) = -\space\text{det}(\mathbf{A}) = -(-4) = 4$
Row Scaling: $\text{det}(\mathbf{C}) = 3\space\text{det}(\mathbf{B}) = 3(4) = 12$
Row Addition: $\text{det}(\mathbf{D}) = \space\text{det}(\mathbf{C}) = 12$

### plain

At this point you probably realise that the answer is esentially a <b>multiplication</b> of the effects of the EROs!!

And since we know that EROs can be written as elementary matrices, this brings us to the next theorem that sums up this 'phenomenon'!

### mcq

But before that, let's realise some things about elementary matrices!
Suppose an elementary matrix that represents row addition:

$$
\mathbf{E} = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 2 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}
$$What is $\text{det}(\mathbf{E})$?
- -2
- 2
* 1
- -1

### plain
E is a triangular matrix!
$\text{det}(\mathbf{E}) = 1(1)(1) = 1$

### mcq
Similarly, for the other types of elementary matrices:
$$

\mathbf{E} = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \end{pmatrix}, \space \text{(row swap)}

$$
What is $\det(\mathbf{E})?$
- 1
- 0
* -1

### plain
Applying cofactor expansion,
$\det(\mathbf{E}) = -1$

### mcq
$$

\mathbf{E} = \begin{pmatrix} c & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}, \space\text{(row scaling)}

$$
What is $\det(\mathbf{E})?$
- 0
- 1
- -c
* c

### plain
$\mathbf{E}$ is a triangular matrix!
$\det(\mathbf{E}) = c$

### plain
Now that we established the determinants of the elementary matrices representing each ERO, it is time to connect the dots!

Do you see what we have been doing so far? Performing EROs on $\mathbf{A} \rightarrow\mathbf{R}$ can be wrriten as $\mathbf{E} \mathbf{A} = \mathbf{R}$
And what we have esentially been doing is $\det(\mathbf{R}) = \det(\mathbf{E}) \det(\mathbf{A})$.

### tex Theorem2
Further generalising it:
Let $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{R}$ be square matrices such that
$$\mathbf{R} = \mathbf{E_k}\cdots\mathbf{E_2}\mathbf{E_1}\mathbf{A}$$for some elementary matrices $\mathbf{E_1},\mathbf{E_2},\cdots,\mathbf{E_k}$. Then,
$$\text{det}(\mathbf{R}) = \text{det}(\mathbf{E_k})\cdots\text{det}(\mathbf{E_2})\space\text{det}(\mathbf{E_1})\space\text{det}(\mathbf{A})$$


### mcq
Let's try this out!
$$

A \xrightarrow{R_2\space -\space 4R_1}{}
\xrightarrow{R_2\space\leftrightarrow{\space R_3}}{}
\xrightarrow{-5R_1} B

$$
$$

E_1 = \begin{pmatrix} -5 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix},
E_2 = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ -4 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix},
E_3 = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \end{pmatrix}
$$How do we form an equation connecting $A, B, E_1, E_2$ and $E_3$?

- $E_1\space E_3\space E_2 \space A = B$

* $E_1\space E_2\space E_3 \space A = B$
* $E_3\space E_2\space E_1 \space A = B$
* $E_2\space E_1\space E_3 \space A = B$

### plain

Recall that EROs can be written as elementary matrices and the order of premultiplying them is the same as the order in which the row operations are applied!

Order of ERO operation: $E_2$, $E_3$, $E_1$
Therefore: $E_1\space E_3\space E_2 \space A = B$

### mcq

Now you are given that $\det(A) = -3$, what is $\det(B)$?

- 15

* -15

- No idea...

### plain

Recall that $\det(B)$ is just the multiplication of $\det(A)$ and $\det(\text{Elementary Matrices})$

Therefore:
$\det(B) = \det(E_1)\det(E_3) \det(E_2) \det(A) \\
        = (-5)(-1)(1)(-3) \\
        = -15$

### plain

To summarise in simple terms:

If you perform multiple EROs on a matrix, the total effect on the determinant is just the <b>product of the effects</b> of each elementary matrix. This is exactly how we can compute determinants efficiently using row operations!
